Are trail runners, light hiking boots, or heavier backpacking boots best for backpacking?
14 Answers
Joshua Levy
Joshua Levy, A couple thousand miles of hiking here and there around California.
Written Nov 14, 2011
Unfortunately, this is a long answer, because it turns out it's a complex question. In fact, you are unlikely to get consistent answers on it, even from experienced backpackers, because everyone has opinions that vary a lot depending on their experiences.

First, the kinds of footwear you need depend on the environment and season. For mountaineering, backpacking in winter or off-season, or at altitudes where there is lots of snow or ice, you generally need boots specialized for the situation. So for this discussion, let's assume we're talking about  backpacking in a temperate environment like the Sierras in summer, where most kinds of footwear potentially work fine. Secondly, there are many kinds of boots, and also alternatives like sandals (or even going barefoot), so for simplicity let's consider the question of running shoes versus hiking boots.

For a long time, many experienced backpackers (Colin Fletcher, for example -- though he also liked sandals) have used boots, because of stability, durability, and probably also tradition, since running shoes have evolved a lot since the '70s. So this is a tried and true approach.

In recent decades, styes have changed a lot. Lightweight backpackers like long-distance hiker Ray Jardine (who's hiked the Pacific Crest Trail, Continental Divide Trail, and Appalachian Trail all multiple times) have promoted much ligher packs and minimal equipment and the use of running shoes.

The main advantages of running shoes over boots are:

    Ligher weight. This is the key advantage, as it means significantly reduced fatigue for long distances. After hiking in heavy boots or shoes, the contrast is obvious and enjoyable. This also means greater distances covered per day. (Experienced lightweight backpackers routinely hike 30+ miles a day, distances most more traditional backpackers wouldn't consider.)
    Better comfort. They usually do not need to be "broken in" if they fit well.
    General agility climbing and scrambling.
    While not waterproof, they dry very quickly, so crossing creeks and wading is very easy -- just do it. With wool socks, hiking with wet feet is generally not uncomfortable (unless it's cold or so continuously wet your feet remain soaked for days). Most leather or Gore-Tex boots, once soaked through, take days to dry out and can be uncomfortable, so hikers often wish to remove them to cross streams, which takes time and may require carrying a second pair of shoes.
    Cheaper.


The downsides of running shoes are:

    Usually not waterproof, so feet can get very cold in snow or cold water. Waterproof Gore-Tex running shoes are usually not much help here, because water or snow will still run over the top eventually.
    No ankle support when compared to boots with stiff uppers. This is a significant issue for some people with weak ankles, or those used to boots. Also, if you have a heavy pack, you are likely to be more clumsy, making risk of ankle injury greater. People who hike a lot with running shoes usually point out that as you hike more, your technique improves and your ankle muscles strengthen, so in fact it may be better to develop these muscles, rather than rely on boots to protect you.
    Flexible soles. While some people say you should have stiffer soles to carry more load, this usually doesn't make a lot of sense on flat terrain. Stiff soles do tend to protect a bit better against pointed rocks. And they are absolutely necessary for mountaineering situations where you would need a mountaineering boot: On steep snow or ice, you must kick steps into the snow to remain upright.
    Your feet get dirtier, since dust can migrate through the shoe.
    Lack of durability. Hikers on the PCT, for example, usually replace their shoes multiple times in a summer.


The fact is, many people use both successfully, though increasingly backpackers are using lighter-weight packs and lighter-weight shoes when they can. Most of the fastest long-distance thru-hikers, who are on trails in summertime, now use lightweight shoes.

My personal recommendation would be that if you're planning to backpack in an environment that is not too cold or snowy, do try out running shoes, but keep in mind:

    Do it gradually -- if you've not hiked a lot, and are using running shoes on rough terrain, you might indeed twist an ankle. Develop these muscles slowly, and don't go hundreds of miles until you have confidence in the strength of your feet and ankles and grow used to it.
    As with any backpacking trip, sure you have appropriate first aid to deal with injuries like ankle sprains, and ideally someone else to help you should this happen.
    At the same time, keep your pack light. This has many advantages itself, but probably also reduces risk of injury and fatigue, and certainly improves enjoyment of backpacking, and better lets you appreciate the advantages of running shoes. That said, do it with care, as leaving anything important behind can jeopardize your safety.


For further reading, one of the best modern resources on lightweight backpacking is backpackinglight.com. Ray Jardine's book is also a very interesting read by a master backpacker, but it's also rather idiosyncratic, so should not be your only source for information.
7.9k Views · View Upvotes
Related Questions
More Answers Below

    What are some beautiful and secluded hiking/backpacking trails in Argentina?
    What are the best hiking boots for mountain trails?
    What are some suggestions for trail hiking shoes rather than hiking boots?
    What is the best way to lace hiking boots?
    What are the best shoes/boots to wear for hiking Kilimanjaro?

John Ladd
John Ladd, Mostly a 4-season backpacker, but try to get on dayhikes often, mostly in the...
Written Feb 8, 2015
Here's the distribution of footwear choices among a sample of 727 John Muir Trail hikers in 2014. I'm in the midst of data analysis to see if footwear choices affect outcomes like completion of the intended hike, blisters, etc. Facebook members can follow survey results at John Muir Trail Hiker Survey or e-mail me with any questions and comments JohnLadd at gmail dot com
1.6k Views · View Upvotes
Mia Rotondi
Mia Rotondi, Senior Marketing Specialist at ShoeBuy
Written Oct 29, 2015
Whether you've been an avid hiker for years or a novice, it's worth doing some research, as the selection and options are vast (and if it's been awhile since you bought a new pair, you might be surprised by just how much is out there!). One of the first steps to selecting a new pair of hiking boots is narrowing in on the activity you're buying for and specifically, the load you're carrying, as the type of boot you need is very dependent on the intensity of your typical hiking experience.

Day Trip
If you're more of day hiker and enjoy taking in the outdoors for an afternoon without lugging around a heavy load, hiking shoes provide support and traction without weighing you down. For the ultra-quick hiker, trail running shoes are an even lighter choice, offering additional grip without sacrificing comfort.

When you're out for a shorter excursion and likely don't have much (if any) equipment to carry, you can typically forego the higher ankle boot style and wear something shorter at will allow you to move quicker and faster. Additionally, a hiking boot or shoe with a flexible rubber outsole not only provides great grip, but also easily adapts to terrain. Whereas a rigid boot is best if you need substantial support to carry a heavy load for an extended period of time, when you're quickly scaling a mountain or rocky trail, more flexible footwear will keep you moving safely onward and upward.

Weekend Hike
For longer excursions, you may want to consider a slightly more substantial shoe, and a mid-cut hiking boot offers that added level of ankle support that you won't get from a shorter style.

Another feature to pay attention to is the sole; while some flexibility is still key here, a durable lug sole will offer increased stability and traction due to the deep indentations in the rubber.

Extended Journey
While your first instinct when looking for new hiking boots may be to splurge for the most expensive and solid pair, high-cut and rigid styles should be reserved for the serious backpacker who is setting out to traverse harsh terrain with a heavy pack.

Other Features to consider:

    Ventilation & Waterproofing: when you're out hiking, whether for an afternoon or days at a time, it's important for your feet to stay dry, but you want them to breathe, too. A lining like the GORE-TEX membrane, which is found in many popular brands, provides protection from wet conditions and wind while also allowing perspiration to pass through. That being said, if you typically hike in dry and hot conditions, you may benefit from a boot or shoe with an upper made of mesh instead to really promote airflow.
    Arch Support: the type of hiking shoe or boot you need is very dependent on the type of activity in which you're involved. That being said, especially if you're carrying a heavy backpack, it's important to pay attention to the arch support provided by your footwear of choice. Many boots include an EVA Midsole which helps to disperse weight and provides stability, so be sure to keep this feature in mind as you consider various styles.

708 Views · View Upvotes
Joel Askey
Joel Askey, Extensive backpacking experience in the North Cascades region.
Written Oct 18, 2011
The best answer is "it depends".

If your pack weighs less than 30 pounds and you're hiking a trail that isn't particularly uneven/rocky and the trip is shorter, you can get by with lighter shoes: Tennis shoes, trail runners, even Chaco sandals.

If you have a heavier pack, are hiking a longer trip, and encounter uneven/rocky trail conditions frequently, you will benefit from a boot that has a strong strike plate.  To test this, you should not be able to bend the soles of your shoe into a U shape.  If you can, the shoes will punish your feet.
907 Views · View Upvotes
Myk OLeary
Myk OLeary, Web Services Developer
Written Sep 30, 2011
Other things to keep in mind if you ditch ankle support in favor of weight:

* know basic sprain first aid (splint and swath)

* use trekking poles for a bit of extra support. The weight they add is quite often less than the extra weight of a full backcountry boot. They can also serve double duty for other things like tarp shelters and what not. Most ultralight hikers I know carry poles.

* if you are going to go off trail know the terrain before you go light on shoes. Meadows may be ok for trail runners, but brambles and blow down are not as easy or good.
807 Views · View Upvotes
Shannon Larson
Shannon Larson, Hurricane Island Outward Bound School alum (14 day canoeing and backpacking)
Written Jun 18, 2010
Lighter shoes means less fatigue from picking up your feet. If you are running, this is a very important consideration.

However, lack of ankle support in trail runners leaves you vulnerable to injury, and as User mentions, trail running shoes will wear out quicker. Hiking boots also have much better traction than trail runners (according to article cited by Mike Veytsel). If you are carrying a 50-pound pack up mountains, traction is essential.

If you are not running on the trail, I would go with hiking boots. They are purpose-built for hiking/backpacking.
454 Views
Ryan Leglu
Ryan Leglu, Avid Outdoorsman. Eagle Scout.
Written Sep 21, 2011
I must say, I am not sold on the Trail runners quite yet and the main reason why is ankle support. I need a light boot with solid ankle support when I hike because of how many times I've rolled my ankle while boulder hopping, walking through/across rivers or just a fast paced hike through uncertain ground cover.

Although I could always benefit from a lighter shoe, I will not trade the comfort of knowing my safety is not always on the line when I step up the pace.

Keith brings up a good point though. My pack for a 5 day trip is around 25 pounds. If I were to [God forbid] put on a 45-50 pound pack, a more sturdy shoe would be helpful. Day hikes = trail runners no prob.
830 Views · View Upvotes
Matt Stone
Matt Stone
Written Mar 8

Beware of the answers that claim that boots are superior because of "ankle support." It's only possible to roll your ankle when you have an elevated heel, as boots do. I stopped wearing boots for several reasons, the greatest of which was always turning my ankles like I was walking in high heels!

I'd strongly recommend getting the lightest, flattest-soled pair of shoes you can stand, wear one, and strap another pair to your pack. Your feet will probably hurt like hell at first, but feet toughen up a lot if you consistently walk daily.

Having two pairs will allow you to always have a nice dry pair while the other is drying. It's nice to have a backup as well, as lighter, thinner shoes have a higher chance of falling apart mid-trip.

While that may sound excessive, the two pairs of shoes I bring combined weigh less than half of one of my old Raichle behemoths.

And man is it less taxing to hike in shoes that weigh a few ounces compared to a few pounds. There's something empowering about toughening up your feet and walking more naturally as well--it jives well with the whole spirit of the activity of backpacking.
310 Views · View Upvotes
Timothy Lee
Timothy Lee, Instructional Designer / Technical Trainer. National seminar leader on small ...
Written Jun 10, 2011
The trend is to go with trail runners as they weigh the least. Even though your shoes are on your feet, you will still expend significant energy picking up and putting down your feet. Less weight equals a better outdoor experience. You might drop by WhiteBlaze.net where all the Appalachian Trail hikers hang out and read some of their gear reviews on boots. The site has a search feature, which should be used before starting a new thread asking about boots.
937 Views · View Upvotes
Ben Rohrs
Ben Rohrs, Product Manager at Zendesk
Written Dec 30, 2010
I would agree with the previous answers, trail runners have less support so I only use them on an overnight trip with a light pack.  Another factor to consider is the amount of water on the ground.  In California, I usually only wear trail runners later in the summer since there is often numerous stream crossings and/or puddles to cross when hiking earlier in the year.

One more thing, if you're scrambling over rocks, trail runners work well but will get ripped by sharp edges much more easily than hiking boots.
665 Views
Mike Veytsel
Mike Veytsel, pattern vision
Written Jun 17, 2010
Mark Verber has a good discussion on the merits vs. concerns with trail runners:
http://www.verber.com/mark/outdo...

I tend to agree with his point of view, but of course, in the end, it's a question of personal preference and comfort.
283 Views
Joseph Skinkis
Joseph Skinkis, World traveler. Backpacked through North America, Europe, North Africa, and Asia.
Written Oct 30, 2014
If your traveling through cities and the country side, get high-top gore-tex shoes to go along with your gore-tex pants and jacket (with a hood). I traveled for years through America, Canada, Europe, Northern Africa, and Asia with this outfit and never got wet inside.
538 Views
Thomas Chase
Thomas Chase
Written Sep 1, 2014
For backpacking, i must say that the lighter hiking shoes are simply awesome and is the best option for your journey. Secondly, make sure that you have proper socks with your hiking shoes , as hiking socks are different. There are a lot of light weight hiking shoes that you can check at http://thecampingtrail.net/besth... and even can compare the features. Thanks!!
517 Views
Keith Baitsell
Keith Baitsell
Written Jun 20, 2011
The move to trail runners and plain old running shoes is part of a trend started by Ray Jardine.  You can use a lighter shoe for the back country as long as you don't carry much weight on your back.  The two go hand in hand.

If you must carry a heavy load (more than 40 lbs.) think about a heavier shoe.
